Setup Document for Development Environment -Week 1 Assignment
Matthew Muthee

---

Task 1: Select and Install Your Operating System (OS)

Step 1: Download Windows 11
1. Visit the Windows 11 download page: https://www.microsoft.com/software-download/windows11
2. Click on "Download Now" and follow the instructions to create a Windows 11 installation media.

Step 2: Install Windows 11
1. Boot your computer from the Windows 11 installation media.
2. Follow the on-screen instructions to install Windows 11 on your machine.
3. Activate Windows 11 using a valid product key if prompted.

---

Task 2: Install a Text Editor or Integrated Development Environment (IDE)

Step 1: Download Visual Studio Code
1. Visit the Visual Studio Code download page: https://code.visualstudio.com/Download
2. Click on the appropriate version for your OS and download the installer.

Step 2: Install Visual Studio Code
1. Run the downloaded installer.
2. Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.
3. Launch Visual Studio Code.

---

Task 3: Set Up Version Control System

Step 1: Install Git
1. Visit the Git download page: https://git-scm.com/download/win
2. Download the Git installer for Windows.
3. Run the installer and follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation.

Step 2: Configure Git
1. Open Git Bash.
2. Configure your Git username and email:
   git config --global user.name "Your Name"
   git config --global user.email "youremail@example.com"

Step 3: Create a GitHub Account
1. Visit GitHub: https://github.com and sign up for an account.

Step 4: Initialize a Git Repository
1. Open Visual Studio Code.
2. Open the terminal (View > Terminal).
3. Initialize a Git repository:
   git init
4. Make your first commit:
   git add .
   git commit -m "Initial commit"
5. Push to GitHub:
   git remote add origin https://github.com/mattheaven/repo.git
   git push -u origin master

---

Task 4: Install Necessary Programming Languages and Runtimes

Step 1: Install Python
1. Visit the Python download page: https://www.python.org/downloads/
2. Download the latest version of Python.
3. Run the installer and make sure to check the box "Add Python to PATH".
4. Verify the installation:
   python --version

---

Task 5: Install Package Managers

Step 1: Install pip (Python Package Manager)
1. Pip is included with Python 3. Ensure it is installed:
   pip --version

---

Task 6: Configure a Database (MySQL)

Step 1: Download MySQL
1. Visit the MySQL download page: https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/windows/installer/5.7.html
2. Download the MySQL Installer.

Step 2: Install MySQL
1. Run the MySQL Installer.
2. Follow the on-screen instructions to install MySQL.
3. Select MySQL server

---

Task 8: Explore Extensions and Plugins

Step 1: Explore Visual Studio Code Extensions
1. Open Visual Studio Code.
2. Go to the Extensions view by clicking the Extensions icon in the Activity Bar.
3. Search for and install desired extensions:
   - Python
   - Live Server
   - Prettier - Code formatter

---

Reflection on Challenges and Strategies

During the setup process, there's several challenges I encountered, such as compatibility issues, configuration errors, or network-related problems. Here are some common challenges and strategies to overcome them:

- Challenge: Compatibility Issues
  - Strategy: Ensure that the system meets the minimum requirements for the software being installed. Use virtualization to create compatible environments if necessary.

- Challenge: Configuration Errors
  - Strategy: Follow the installation guides carefully and refer to official documentation for troubleshooting. Seek help from community forums or support channels if needed.

- Challenge: Network Problems
  - Strategy: Check the internet connection and firewall settings. Retry downloads or use alternative download sources if available.
